Hello and welcome back to the course in
R programming and today we're talking
about matrices and you're probably
wondering,
Kirill why are matrices so important that we
have to devote a whole section of the
course to this topic?
Well the answer to this question was
actually in the previous tutorial. As you
could see, even the data for
basketball players careers is presented
to us in table format and in R tables
are stored in matrices and that is how
the world the data is most of the time
it's stored in table format and if we
want to know how to work with it and
inevitably we will need to because we're
data scientist or data analyst and
so if we want to know how to operate
with tables we will need to know how
matrices are structured in R and how
they operate and moreover as you will
see from further down in the course, there's
another type of object which is called a
data frame. So matrices are also a
stepping stone in order to get to
data frames, so let's dive straight into it. So
what do we know so far? So far we know
how to work with vectors, here's an
example of a five element numeric vector. A
vector has one dimension, now what
happens if we actually want to work with
tables and as we know tables have two
dimensions. They have the number of
columns and they also have rows. So how
do we operate tables in R?
Well here's an example of the table that
has five columns and three rows, let's
start by saying that there's some
data in this table. Let's say this
this number 50 replicated across the
whole table. Now obviously in order to
work with the table we're going to have
to somehow recognize the second
dimension and that's why there's another
set of indexation over here. So we've got
one, two, three, four, five on the top and
one, two, three on the left and so that's
what a matrix looks like in R, so
basically it's just a table. Now because
we have the second set of indices were
inevitably going to run into a problem
and what this problem?
Well let's say we have this matrix and
let's say it has a name it's called A
and let's say we want to somehow get to
this number zero in the matrix.
Inevitably we're going to
run into a problem if we're going to
try to use the methods for indexation
that we know for vectors. Let's have a
look. Let's try calling out this number
zero using the methods that we know for
vectors. Let's say, we will call it using
A4 but that's incorrect right? Because
if you call it using A4 then there's
actually three elements in the fourth
column. So how will R know which one
exactly you want?
So that's not going to work, let's try a
different approach. Let's say A3, but
now how is R going to know, do you mean
the third row or do you mean the third column
and if you mean either than which
element do you actually mean in one of
these? So that's also not going to work
for us.
So the way you index a matrix in R is
you put two numbers in the square
brackets separated by comma. The first
number will mean the row that you want
to look up. So in this case, it will be
the third row and second number will
mean the column that you want to look at
and that will mean the fourth column in
this case and wherever these two cross so
in this case over here at the number
zero, that's exactly the element that
will be returned. So that is how you
index an element inside a matrix.
Ok so that's our indexation and this new
method of indexation is actually going to
bring some new concepts into what we
know. So you see these indices on the
left here,
well in R they're actually represented
in different way. Instead of just one, two,
three,
what we're going to have is one in
square brackets, with a comma, two in square
brackets with a comma and three in square
brackets with a comma.
So what does that mean and why is that
there? Well basically it's the same one,
two, three
but it's just in line with what we now
know and why is that? Well that is
because if you put the letter A in front
of anyone of these, so let's say A1, A2 or
A3, what you'll get is the corresponding
full row. So for instance A[1, ]
because here A[ 3,4 ] meant the
crossing of the third row and the fourth
column but if you say A[1, ]
you mean just the first row not crossing
any of the columns. So basically in R
that is a way to take this whole row
out of the matrix.
There we go, so that's A[1, ]
and same thing goes for the top
indexes over here. Now that we know
how to index inside the matrix. Their
representation is actually going to be
different so instead of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 we're
going to have brackets comma one,
brackets comma two, brackets comma three,
brackets comma four,
brackets comma five because we know
that the second element inside these
brackets means the number of the column
and that is it's basically the same
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 but it's just reminding you that
if you want to select any one of these
given rows like let's say for instance
a you want to select the fifth row
all you have to do is say A brackets nothing,
so you don't have to put a space
here then comma 5 and then brackets
close in that case you will select
exactly the fifth row. So that is how
indexation in matrices works. Now we're
here we're running a bit ahead of
ourselves
this relates to the topic of subsetting
and we'll talk about subsetting further down
the track but I just wanted to explain
to you, how why exactly these matrices
have a bit of a different style in
representing their indices and that's
exactly why, it is because that's how you
index a matrix or how you get inside the
matrix and that's just they're just basically
reflecting that exact concept.
Ok so that's nearly all on matrices, the
last thing you need to know about them
is that in R, a matrix can only have
elements of the exact same type. So just
like a vector, you cannot put into a
matrix elements of different times so you can't
put a character number for instance into
one matrix. If you tried to do that, then
all numbers will be converted into
characters just like we saw with vectors.
So that's one of the core principles of
matrices and now you know how the
structure and how to also index them and I
look forward to seeing you in the next
tutorial.
Until then, happy coding!